## The Conceptual Value of a Mathematical Education ##

Concisely, math provides tools for thinking (not as obvious to sounds). It is easy to mistake math for being concerned primarily with the mechanics of solving various problems, with quantitative descriptions, or with relationships between abstract entities, and to think _learning_ math is primarily about learning these. to be is that a mathematical education foregrounds the interplay between heuristic and precise forms of reasoning, demonstrates the profound sparseness of valid generalizations and their genesis from observable (or axiomatic) truth, and sheds light on the wondrous and combinatorial nature of natural phenomena. This and so much more.

### Math as prefigurative practice ###
It is easy to mistake math for a toolkit with which one becomes familiar, tailored to specific problems of niche technical interest. This is because it _is_ such a toolkit of course, but one would not mistake a home for a collection of items tailored to the problem, for example, of sitting. There is a proper gestalt which organizes the affordances collected in a home, namely the concept of a living space. Recognizing this allows for a generative understanding of the concept. What things _should_ a living space contain? What makes a poor one, and why? Furthermore, these organizing principles are no more the most interesting or valuable aspects of a home than their analogues are the most interesting or valuable aspects of mathematics. The interesting question is "what does having a home teach you about the world?" (A gap, I know, but think about it.) The tragedy of mathematical instruction, insofar as I am familiar with it, is that we do not even aim to lead students to the parallel question with regard to formalism or problem solving. At worst, we aim for the short sighted utilitarianism that has given the humanities (and scholars thereof) such short shrift, while at best we aim for a sort of prefiguration, whereby meaning will emerge from doing, as mediated by the acquisition of facility. While this is by no means out of the picture, it explains the aforementioned misconceptions. Some things are easy to learn, or to become by doing. Others are not. Ideally, instruction is a tool for side-stepping this barrier. Unfortunately, it is not deployed in this instance for the broader benefit of mathematical pupils. I imagine this is because it is the result of ad-hoc-ery or happenstance, the usual hidden architects of most of our enclosures, but that is a lengthy digression I treat [elsewhere](./ad-hoc.md)

So what is the central point of mathematics? I will argue below for more than one, but predominantly it is this: Do not attempt to solve hard problems. Or if you prefer: Only solve easy problems. And on a related point: Incrementalism provides approximately WYSIWYG (what you see is what you get) results, and can include apparently radical breaches provided the appropriate framework (thinking here of Hamiltonian Monte-Carlo.)

### A hard problem is an easy problem in disguise ###
Or maybe, it is two; The problem of identifying the easy problem, and the easy problem itself. 